---
title: Signing Git commits with GPG
tags: [git, gpg, github, security]
---

Anyone can make a Git commit using any name and any email address. What prevents
someone from using my name and my email to contribute a malicious commit, or
even simply a commit no representative of me?

By default, nothing.

Git does, however, support signing commits and tags using a GPG key pair. Doing
so verifies that the commit was created by the owner of that key: you.
Furthermore, after sharing your public key with Github, your signed commits are
marked as `[verified]` for everyone to see. At that point, any commit made by
"you" which is unsigned should be considered untrusted.

### Setup
Assuming you have a GPG key pair generated already (if not, see
[here](https://www.gnupg.org/gph/en/manual.html#INTRO)), you can begin signing
all of your commits with one Git setting change:

```bash
$ git config --global commit.gpgsign true
```

Each time you commit now, you'll be prompted for your GPG password. To be
prompted in the current terminal, as opposed to in a GUI popup, there's one more
setting you should change, this time for GPG directly. In your `~/.bashrc` (or
similar), add the following:

```bash
# Always prompt for GPG password from terminal
export GPG_TTY=$(tty)
```

When you commit, you'll be prompted with a TUI along the lines of:

```text
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│ Please enter the passphrase to unlock the secret   │
│ key for the OpenPGP certificate:                   │
│ "Jeaye <contact@pastespace.org>"                   │
│ 2048-bit RSA key, ID 6C61E510,                     │
│ created 2016-01-13.                                │
│                                                    │
│                                                    │
│ Passphrase *********************__________________ │
│                                                    │
│       <OK>                            <Cancel>     │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

If you'd like to manually specifiy which key is used when signing, you can do so
with the following:

```bash
# Replace FFFFFFFF with your key id
git config --global user.signingkey FFFFFFFF
```

Note that this isn't typically needed, as your default key will be chosen by git
automatically.

### Importance
Some people think it's only important to sign tags to mark releases or specific
points at which everything has been verified. Arguably, *every single commit*
should be signed. You're held responsible for every change you push to every
repository; someone misrepresenting you can be done with a simple config change
if you're not habitually signing commits.

This is why I've provided the config to enable signing by default and I
encourage any individual or team to do the same. For a more illustrative
explanation of this,
[see here](https://mikegerwitz.com/papers/git-horror-story.html).
