---
title: Don't abandon Mozilla Firefox just yet
categories: [firefox, rant, privacy, security]
tags: [firefox, pocket, mozilla, chromium, google, privacy, security]
---

Just today, a [diatribe against
Mozilla](https://drewdevault.com/2017/12/16/Firefox-is-on-a-slippery-slope.html)
made it to the front page of Hacker News, gathering a [great deal of
discussion](https://news.ycombinator.com/item?id=15940144). Unfortunately, a
significant portion of that discussion was around choosing alternatives to
Firefox, forking it, or otherwise abandoning ship. Please, if you do care about
your privacy, security, and voice in the matter, refrain from the brash
decisions and read on.

### Some of the key issues
Briefly, some of the issues being discussed are the uninvited introduction of
[Firefox Pocket](https://getpocket.com/firefox/), as well as the [side-loading
of plugins](https://bugzilla.mozilla.org/show_bug.cgi?id=1424977) by Mozilla,
used in aid of promotion of a TV show. The effect of this promotion is mostly
benign, but the problem is that this was done entirely unbeknownst to the user
and was enabled by default.

### So, time for a new browser
This is the next logic step for a number of participants thus far, but I think
they're not quite considering the implications of using those browsers, as well
as the possibility that Mozilla is not a completely lost cause. First, a bit on
forks and soft forks, as well as Chrome and Chromium.

### Chrome and Chromium
Perhaps the worst result of this assault is that Firefox users will jump over to
Chrome. Put simply, since the issue here is about privacy and control over one's
browser, that makes absolutely no sense. This is a serious problem with
diatribes against Mozilla for something so relatively small; compared to Google,
and the lack of privacy you have within its ecosystem, these Mozilla nitpicks
are bantam.

Even with Chromium, there are still in-built Google services which impose upon
your privacy. This has lead to the soft fork
[ungoogled-chromium](https://github.com/Eloston/ungoogled-chromium), but forks
have their own baggage to carry as well.

### Forks of Firefox or Chromium
To start with, note that browsers are one of the most complex programs running
on your OS. Interfacing with the internet, various sites, technologies, etc.
means that browsers need to be constantly updating to remain secure. Running any
version of Firefox, for example, which is not either the latest or the latest
[ESR](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox/organizations/), is putting yourself
at risk of all of the known exploits which have been found since.

Hard forks are at serious risk of growing stale behind the upstream parent.
Furthermore, any hard fork with a focus on privacy and security will need its
own team of developers specifically looking for and quickly patching
vulnerabilities in both the new code, as well as the originally forked code.
Mozilla pays its security engineers [over $150K per
year](https://www.glassdoor.com/Salary/Mozilla-Security-Engineer-Salaries-E19129_D_KO8,25.htm)
to focus on this sort of work full-time. Replicating that level of commitment
with a hard fork is incredibly difficult.

### Soft forks
A generally safer bet is a soft fork, which follows the upstream parent closely,
but typically just removes some features, or makes some relatively small changes
which allow it to remain quite compatible with its parent. Examples of these
would be [Waterfox](https://www.waterfoxproject.org/) and the previously linked
[ungoogled-chromium](https://github.com/Eloston/ungoogled-chromium). While it's
easier for these projects to follow the progress of the parent, it's still not
guaranteed. Furthermore, the removal of some feature in the soft fork, or the
preservation of an old feature which was removed in the parent, may introduce
new vulnerabilities which are unique to the soft fork.

Catching these new issues would require security-minded individuals working on
the project regularly. Ensuring that the soft fork is following the parent
closely remains up to the whim of those running the project. In short, it's not
nearly as reliable as sticking with a company such as Mozilla, who has been
invested in developing Firefox for over 15 years.

### What to do with Mozilla
*So, don't bite the hand that feeds?*

No, that's not my point. Mozilla shouldn't have side-loaded plugins in my
browser to promote a show of which I'd never even heard. I also still don't like
seeing Pocket there, an uninvited guest in my otherwise tidy browsing
environment. Still, that doesn't mean that Mozilla is evil and I should try my
luck with Google or some fork on Github which managed to get a few hundred
stars. Instead, it's important to voice the opinion to Mozilla that this wasn't
cool and it should be removed. Jumping to a one-off fork is not a sustainable
option; working with Mozilla, as a community, to show how pissed or pleased we
are, at any given moment, is a much more sustainable option.

The [Mozilla
manifesto](https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/about/manifesto/details/) contains a
few great points relevant to this topic. One of which is the involvement of
commercial products in the internet.

> 9. Commercial involvement in the development of the Internet brings many benefits; a balance between commercial profit and public benefit is critical.

This balance is hard to strike. It's the sort of struggle which requires the
community to be as active with Mozilla as the companies for which Mozilla is
advertising. That's not to say it's the community's fault for this happening;
it's to say that Mozilla isn't perfect and we occasionally need to slap it back
into shape. Right now, it'd be great to see more people herding Mozilla and
fewer assuming all is lost.
