---
title: A guide to using NoScript 10.x
labels: [firefox, privacy, security, tutorial]
tags: [firefox, noscript, tutorial, privacy, security, tutorial]
updated: 2018-02-03
---

When Firefox 57 arrived, NoScript 5 users were left with the unsettling reality
of not being able to selectively filter JavaScript until the next version was
released, a week or so later. Worse, its release was poorly received, due to
bugs and a brand new UI. Now that the dust has settled, and the bugs have been
vanquished, NoScript users are still presented with the foreign UI and little to
no official documentation. This post will serve as a guide for both old and new
NoScript 10 users to get up to speed.

### The trust levels
Each domain in NoScript 10 has a trust level. By default, each domain is under
the **Default** trust level, but you may find your old NoScript domains already
under the **Trusted** level. These are familiar to previous NoScript users: the
default is not to allow JavaScript, but domains can be explicitly **Trusted** or
**Temporarily Trusted**. NoScript 10 also adds two more levels: **Untrusted**
and **Custom**.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/intro.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/intro.png alt:"intro" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

Though the UI makes this a bit unclear, these trust levels are columns. For each
domain, one button is selected, meaning one trust level.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/trust-levels.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/trust-levels.png alt:"trust levels" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### Editing trust levels
Each trust level can be edited to describe what happens when you set a domain to
that level. For **Default**, **Temporarily Trusted**, **Trusted**, and
**Untrusted**, that configuration is global. That is, you you say that the
**Default** trust level should trust fonts (by checking the *fonts* checkbox),
but nothing else, then *every domain* in that trust level will have that
setting. When you modify the **Custom** trust level, it's per-domain.

To edit a global trust level, enter the NoScript settings page by clicking the
settings button in the NoScript menu.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/settings-button.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/settings-button.png alt:"settings button" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

Once you're there, you can specify the global properties for each trust level.
Note that the properties for **Temporarily Trusted** reflect whatever you have
set for **Trusted**. The only difference is that **Temporarily Trusted** domains
are only trusted for the current session.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/edit-trust-levels.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/edit-trust-levels.png alt:"edit trust levels" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### Safe defaults
NoScript 10 allows for more control over what's filtered. Scripts, objects,
media, frames, fonts, WebGL, fetch, and other things can all be filtered. Since
you're using NoScript for privacy, I recommend changing your **Default** trust
level to uncheck all items. If you trust a domain completely, add it to the
**Trusted** level. If you only want some items from it, like fonts and WebGL,
then use a **Custom** trust level for that domain.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/safe-defaults.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/safe-defaults.png alt:"safe defaults" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### Top-level domain configuration
When browsing sites and using NoScript 10, you'll likely notice that a domain
will show up multiple times within the NoScript menu. This is because NoScript
10 allows you to modify the trust level of the specific domain used (such as
`blog.jeaye.com`), as well as the entire top-level domain (such as `jeaye.com`).
If you set a top-level domain to a specific trust level, that trust level will
apply to all sub-domains as well. This is very handy for marking entire
ad/tracking domains as **Untrusted**.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/sub-domains.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/sub-domains.png alt:"sub-domains" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### Permanent trust levels
When getting a site to work, I recommend only marking the domains as
**Temporarily Trusted**. Once the site is in working condition, you can upgrade
them to permanently **Trusted**. If you don't plan on returning to the site
often, consider leaving the trust level temporary.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/temporary-trust.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/temporary-trust.png alt:"temporary trust" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### Trusting HTTPS only
NoScript 10 provides the ability to trust a domain only if it's through a secure
connection. You can tell if this is enabled by whether or not the lock, which
appears on that domain's row, is green or red. If it's red, then the domain will
be trusted even through unencrypted connections. This is a concern, since
unencrypted connections are vulnerable to MITM attacks and you may be trusting
arbitrary and nefarious JavaScript. I recommend making sure the lock is always
green (you can click on the lock to toggle it).

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/green-lock.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/green-lock.png alt:"green lock" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/red-lock.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/red-lock.png alt:"red lock" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

For previous NoScript users, I also recommend going back through your whole
trusted list and setting all domains to have a green lock. You can get to that
list by clicking the options button within the NoScript menu. There isn't an
automatic process for marking them all green yet, but it only took me 10 minutes
or so to both ensure all locks are green and do some cleaning of old domains I
no longer need to trust.

<figure>
  <a href="{% asset noscript/all-green.png @path %}" target="_blank">
    {% asset noscript/all-green.png alt:"all green" %}
  </a>
  <br/> <br/>
</figure>

### The remaining UI
With all of that covered, the only two remaining buttons are for revoking all
temporary permissions and temporarily trusting the whole page. You can mouse
over each of them to see a tool tip for what they do; it's analogous to the
previous NoScript's behavior. Finally, at this point, you know all you need to
effectively use NoScript 10. Don't leave home without it!
