---
title: Trying Emacs (evil mode) after 5 years of Vim
tags: [emacs, vim, review]
---

As I've covered in a [previous post](http://blog.jeaye.com/2015/08/23/vimb/), I'm a passionate Vim user; maybe a little obsessive at times. Setting my love for Vim aside, Emacs, being Vim's life-long nemesis, presents some interesting benefits. I took a week, this month, to use Emacs exclusively in my work (including C++14 and Common Lisp) in order to weigh its benefits. Here's what I found.

I would never consider trying Emacs if it didn't have [Evil mode](http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/Evil). I love Vim's modal editing and text object navigations too much. However, once I heard from multiple trusted sources that Emacs' Evil mode is the real deal, Emacs became a more viable option. If I bring Vim to Emacs, I wondered, would there be a net gain? Can Emacs reach parity with Vim and provide a platform for exceeding my current productivity?

My resulting, very cleanly organized, Emacs configs are available [here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles) and I'll be referencing sections of them later.

### Compiling
I run a custom/minimal Slackware 14.1 x86_64 built from source. Slackware 14.1 officially ships Emacs 24.3, but I like to run the latest editors and I also like judge build systems, so I build Emacs 24.5.1 from source.

Emacs uses a standard Automake build, so the typical commands will do the trick:

```bash
$ mkdir build; cd build
$ ../configure && make -j8 && make install
```

However, I install my locally-built software to `~/opt`, and I expect software to use `DESTDIR` properly. Emacs doesn't. As a result, `--prefix` needs to be set during configuration.

```bash
$ mkdir build; cd build
$ ../configure --prefix=/home/jeaye/opt/bin/emacs-24.5
$ make -j8 && make install
```

### Reaching parity with Vim
Once I had emacs installed, I wanted to jump right into getting it up to speed with my Vim muscle memory. Again, I wasn't looking to re-learn how to edit text, I was seeing if Emacs could provide all I want and use from Vim *and more*. Let's take this in sections.

#### Packaging [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-package.el)
To install packages in Emacs, I *highly* recommend [use-package](https://github.com/jwiegley/use-package). You can see, from my configs, just how expressive it is. Combined with lazy loading, it can not only clean up your configs, but also decrease your load times.

#### Evil mode [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-evil.el)
I'll be honest, Evil mode is superb. The gripes I do have with it are minimal and, in general, it behaves just as I'd expect.

Drawbacks:
1. GNU readline chords like `^W` don't work
2. `J`, for merging lines, doesn't keep a space before/after the merged line
3. `:e` works relative to the current file, not Emacs' working directory
4. There is no `:help`; one must use Emacs' help system `M-x C-h M-C-S help RET M-h help` or something
5. Some actions like `^X` and `^A`, for changing numbers, are left out; I use these a lot
6. Evil mode doesn't have a VimL parser, so only plug-ins which have been ported to Elisp can be used
7. `^6`, for alternating files, doesn't work properly; I'm not sure what it's doing

#### CtrlP -> Helm [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-helm.el)
In Vim, CtrlP is the go-to plug-in for fuzzy finding files and buffers. It's fast, super easy to use, has sane defaults, and it _just works_. In Emacs, mimicking CtrlP takes quite a bit more work. The most powerful plug-in which comes into play would be [Helm](http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/Helm). It supports many extensions which can augment your searches and it provides a foundation for achieving CtrlP-like behavior.

In order to have it work well with Git repositories, [Projectile](https://github.com/bbatsov/projectile) is needed. This will allow Helm to search for files within the current Git repository.

Drawbacks:
1. Helm requires quite a bit more setup to get working and its defaults are not nearly as sane
2. Since Emacs lacks proper tab support, Helm has no built-in way of opening something in a new tab
3. Projectile's `projectile-grep` is nowhere near as reliable as vim-fugitive's `:Ggrep`, in my experience

Benefits:
1. Helm, by default, shows completion options in Emacs' equivalent of command mode; I haven't seen anything in Vim which offers real-time mini-buffer completion of fuzzy Vim commands

#### Airline -> Powerline [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-powerline.el)
Powerline exists for Vim as well, but it's very easy to enable with Emacs and it comes with sane defaults.

Benefits:
1. Emacs' platform for rendering is so much more powerful than Vim's. As a result, there are no font hacks needed to show nice graphics in Emacs

#### Tabbing [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-evil.el#L68)
Vim has built-in tabs in both the GUI and TUI. I don't use tabs for every file I have open, but I do use them to visually group files in a way that's more convenient to me than buffers. Furthermore, within each tab, I can have multiple buffer splits laid out as I desire (a tab for a header/source pair, say). Emacs has no official support for tabs and the available plug-ins ([escreen](http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/EmacsScreen) and [elscreen](http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/EmacsLispScreen)) hardly do tab-oriented development justice.

I chose elscreen, via [evil-tabs](https://github.com/krisajenkins/evil-tabs), since its reviews marketed it as the newer alternative.

Drawbacks:
1. Awful, bloated-looking UI in both the GUI and TUI
2. No support for opening from Helm or other buffers
3. No support for moving tabs once opened
4. New tabs always go to the end, not to the right of the current tab

#### YCM -> YCM [Config Here](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-autocomplete.el)
Emacs has a slew of auto-completion plug-ins and none of them looked very standard. When I asked around, it seemed nobody agreed on what provided the best completion. Not only are there multiple backends for getting completion data (too many to list), there are multiple front ends for displaying them (Company and Autocomplete, namely).

Fortunately, I found [emacs-ycmd](https://github.com/abingham/emacs-ycmd) which provides real-time completion using Vim's own YouCompleteMe server. Once this was setup, [barring some nasty bugs in the Company front end](https://github.com/jeaye/emacs-dotfiles/blob/master/config/init-autocomplete.el#L22) completion worked just as I'd like it to. YCM has excellent completion in text files, and its semantic completion in C++ and C# have both made me a happy camper. It's great that Valloric has made his work available on Emacs.

#### color_coded
I use [color_coded](https://github.com/jeaye/color_coded) every day, in C++ work. Unfortunately, there is no alternative in Emacs; no project is even attempting to bring color_coded's functionality to Emacs. Sadly, it's a plug-in that I really love and it's not something I'd want to go without.

Drawbacks:
1. As you can see in the config, the setup for YCM + Company is terribly verbose
2. TAB, in Emacs, means something different to everyone and is not straightforward to just use normally for completions
3. Partial completions didn't work; completing the `foo` in `foo.hpp` would put in its own `.hpp` and leave `foo.hpp.hpp`; Vim handles this nicely

### Summary
Am I still using Emacs? No. I stopped after that week, since I don't see it as providing enough benefits. With that said, let me cover some benefits that it does obviously provide.

Benefits:
1. Elisp is infinitely nicer than VimL

  I'm a proud lisper and I do a fair amount of Common Lisp and Clojure work. Being able to configure my editor with a dialect of such a powerful language is a huge win.

2. Various major modes like Org Mode and the built-in web browsers and IRC clients can make Emacs the proud home of one's whole programming session

3. The possibilities are far less limited than in Vim, allowing arbitrary graphics and a more expressive, powerful programming language

  Writing a game in Emacs, for example, would be much more approachable than in Vim. How practical this is varies, but it does allow for some very complex and useful major modes.

Drawbacks:
1. Emacs start time is slow

  Even with `use-package` lazy-loading my packages, I'm not even fully up to parity with Vim and the start up time is already double

diminish shit

GUI config editing

coloring is bad
  C++ is awful

state of emacs plug-ins
  vim plug-in writers are tenacious

no support for common syntax (need a whole major mode)
  cmake
  markdown

mouse scrolling is jumpy

showing full file path as a buffer name
  uniquify doesn't do it

indentation rules per major mode
  can't just set it to work properly once

terminal coloring is fucked

obviously annoying key chords
  package installation
  modes without evil
