---
title: From vim-gtk to vim-qt
tags: [vim, qt, vim-qt]
---

[vim-qt](https://bitbucket.org/equalsraf/vim-qt/wiki/Home) is a gvim replacement
which aims to address a number of graphical issues in the standard gtk-based
vim. After having used the default gvim for years, and putting up a number of
its quirks, I decided to give vim-qt a run for its money. In short, I was
pleasantly surprised.

### The state of vim-gtk
My most notable gripes with gvim are regarding its cell rendering. If the
`guifont` setting doesn't perfectly match the width of the window, in that
`(window_width % character_with) == 0`, there is some remaining space which is
left uncolored. Depending on your font size and window width, that can be almost
a full character's width. To remedy this, one will need to influence the gtk
renderer using external configs; I haven't had much luck with it.

TODO: image of width issue

Aside from that, gvim's actual GUI elements aren't configurable. Sure, you can
`:set guiopts-=m` to remove the menu, but you can't change the size, color,
 and font of the tabs. You also have no control over where the tool bars render.

TODO: image of tabs

Note that each issue described here is also present in vim-gnome and other vim
GUIs based on vim-gtk.

### What vim-qt offers
Right out of the box, vim-qt resolves the window background color issue. Aside
from that, it also cleans up the tabs a bit, with the help of Qt, so they look a
bit more sleek.

TODO: image of default

vim-qt takes advantage of its powerful Qt backend by allowing [dockable
toobars](https://bitbucket.org/equalsraf/vim-qt/wiki/Features), which adds a
great deal of flexibility over the placement of tabs, file menus, and other
widgets.

The most powerful feature, however, is its support for [Qt style
sheets](http://doc.qt.io/qt-4.8/stylesheet.html), which give you full control
over each individual element in the GUI. After some exploring, and this config,
I was able to turn my vim-qt setup into something much more minimal; it also
fits my color scheme just as I'd like.

TODO: final image

-- doesn't have a man page
-- not sure how active (lots of long-standing bugs)
-- irc channel
