---
title: The deal with C++14 xvalues
tags: [c++, cpp, xvalue, rvalue, lvalue, value-category]
---

I recently published a [C++14 value category
cheat-sheet](https://github.com/jeaye/value-category-cheatsheet/blob/master/value-category-cheatsheet.pdf),
which was created to accompany a tech talk I gave at work. For the most part, examples on
prvalues and lvalues were understood with minimal confusion. However, xvalues
presented the biggest hurdle for existing C++ programmers. I'd like to explore,
in greater detail, why C++11 introduced xvalues and how they are essential to
efficient programming in modern C++.

### Rvalue references
To start, let's cover a _very handy_ feature, introduced in C++11: the ability
to bind rvalues to non-const references. Since this was previously invalid,
like:

```c++
int &a{ 0 }; // MSVC accepting this doesn't make it valid C++
```

We needed a new way of representing this sort of reference. The syntax was
extended to support this notation:

```c+++
int &&a{ 0 };
```

This unique syntax restricts the initialization of the lvalue `a` to only accept
rvalues. For example, this would be invalid:

```c++
int a{};
int &&b{ a }; // compiler error
```

A new way was introduced, in C++11, to get an rvalue from an lvalue:
`std::move`. By moving, you can transition a named value (an lvalue) to being an
rvalue. More specifically, since it can't be a prvalue (it has a name!),
it ends up being an xvalue.

```c++
int a{};
int &&b{ std::move(a) };
```

Why would this matter though? Getting an rvalue reference to an int is useless!
It does indeed matter, since C++11 also introduced _move semantics_, including
_move constructors_ and _move assignment operators_. So, now consider the
following:

```c++
std::string s{ "meow" };
std::string v{ s }; // copies s
std::string m{ std::move(s) }; // takes in an rvalue and moves from it!
// s is now in an undefined, but valid, state
// m is now "meow"
```

These move semantics allow us to rip apart rvalues when constructing other
objects. All of the sudden, the ability to _tag_ an lvalue as an rvalue becomes
so much more useful. You can add some type information, just by using
`std::move`, to any lvalue and the compiler may choose a more optimal constructor
or assignment for you. Behind the scenes, containers like `std::vector` are
already using this for relocating their data. How might this look?

```c++
struct string
{
  string(char const *str) // Typical ctor, ignoring error handling for brevity
  {
    auto const len(::strlen(str));
    data = std::make_unique<char[]>(len);
    std::copy_n(str, len, data.get());
  }
  string(string const &s) // Copy ctor delegates and deep copies
    : string(s.data.get())
  { }
  string(string &&s) // Move ctor steals the data; no deep copy
    : data{ std::move(s.data) }
  { }

  std::unique_ptr<char[]> data;
};

string s{ "meow" };
string f{ s }; // deep copy
string m{ std::move(s) }; // moved out of s; no deep copy
```

`std::unique_ptr`, which cannot be copied and can only be moved, relies entirely
on the existence of xvalues and `std::move` in order for it to transfer
ownership. This is both a safety feature and a performance feature. For safety,
the compiler ensures that a `unique_ptr` only has one owner at a time;
transferring that ownership must also be explicitly done. For performance,
tagging an lvalue as an xvalue can optimize the data transfer, allowing the
compiler to choose the move constructor/assignment operator. These rvalue
references can also open up the door of perfect forwarding, to help eliminate
needless copying through layers of abstraction (as found in `std::bind`).

### Forwarding references (AKA universal references)
As a side effect of rvalue references being added, and a more complex subtlety
in the nature of the _infectious_ behavior of lvalue references, there exists a
phenomenon called forwarding references. Forwarding references rely on the
behavior of _reference collapsing_, and allow a catch-all implementation that
works for both lvalues and rvalues, even both const and non-const. Why would you
want this? Well, you're already using it, whenever you `std::make_shared`:

```c++
// example implementation
template <typename T, typename... Args>
std::shared_ptr<T> make_shared(Args &&...args)
{ return std::shared_ptr<T>{ new T{ std::forward<Args>(args)... } }; }
```

This `make_shared` function has _perfect forwarding_ features. That is, when I
give it an rvalue, the constructor of `T` gets an rvalue, too. Without
forwarding references, this wouldn't be possible. Instead, an rvalue passed to
`make_shared` would become an lvalue and stay that way. Without forwarding
references, it'd look like this:

```c++
template <typename T, typename... Args>
std::shared_ptr<T> make_shared(Args const &...args)
{ return std::shared_ptr<T>{ new T{ args... } }; }
```

All of the args go in as references-to-const, which means that `make_shared`
still accepts rvalues, but now the `T` constructors is only going to get
lvalues. Where might this break? Well, what if something needs to be an rvalue
in order to change ownership? Say, `std::unique_ptr` has a that quality! What if
we call our `make_shared` with just a prvalue `std::unique_ptr<int>`?

```c++
struct foo
{
  // Expects a moved ptr, since these guys can't be copied
  foo(std::unique_ptr<int> ptr)
  { }
};

auto const u(make_shared<foo>(std::unique_ptr<int>{}));
```

If we use _perfect forwarding_, no problem! Our original prvalue
`std::unique_ptr<int>` will remain a prvalue, all the way until it hits the
`foo` constructor. However, if we use the second `make_shared` implementation,
our args will all become lvalues. Unfortunately, this code would no longer
compile; there's no way to copy `std::unique_ptr<int>`! If you're using copyable
types, the code may still compile, but it's needlessly inefficient and will
result in extra copies being made.

The details of how the reference collapsing works with forwarding references is
worthy of its own post entirely -- not surprisingly,
[Meyers](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scott_Meyers) has a [great
talk](https://channel9.msdn.com/Shows/Going+Deep/Cpp-and-Beyond-2012-Scott-Meyers-Universal-References-in-Cpp11)
on the subject. For now, hopefully this covers _why_ the feature exists, at
least, and _how_ you've probably already used it.
